"# imp2026"
IMP-77 for WSL (Windows sub-system for Linux), UNIX/Linux
This version is labeled IMP2026 (but still implements the IMP-77 language)

This version enhances the IMP2024 version of the IMP-77 compiler.
Note that this Git repository only contains the IMP2026 compiler.
The documentation, examples and tools code are now in separate Git repositories.

The documentation is now in the "imp_documents" Git repository.
Imp code examples are now in the "imp_examples" Git repository.
Imp tools sources are now in the "imp_tools" Git repository.

Enhancements:
    1) The run-time library reports line numbers and source module names in a stack trace
       triggered by an IMP signal that has no event handler.
    2) The IMP compiler executables (and library) by default are in the same folder structure as the compiler source

This distribution contains:-
    1) source code of the IMP compiler + run-time library
        (for Intel 386 UNIX/Linux machines that use ELF object files.)
    2) Source code (pass3elf.c) to generate Linux ELF object files
    3) Source code (pass3coff.c) to generate Windows COFF object files


COMMON PRE-REQUISITES

* Copy of the IMP2026 git repository on your Windows/Linux/WSL machine

PRE-REQUISITES FOR LINUX

* Ensure the Linux system has the latest software
    * sudo apt update   (or equivalent Linux command)
    * sudo apt upgrade  (or equivalent Linux command)
* dos2unix
    * sudo apt install dos2unix (or equivalent command)
* A C compiler and libraries. (Build tested against the gcc compiler suite)
    * Ensure the C compiler can compile/link 32-bit code
    * sudo apt install gcc-multilib  (for the gcc compiler)
* Read, Write + executable access to the compiler source folders (and optionally to the /usr/local folder and sub-folders)


PRE-REQUISITES FOR WINDOWS (Versions 8 upwards)

* A C compiler + libraries. (Build tested with Visual Studio in command-line mode)


POSSIBLE REQUIRED TWEAKS FOR COMPILER INSTALLATION:

The Makefiles supplied don't try to figure out local installed software or
policies, so you may need to make some changes.  In particular:

1.  The Makefiles assume GCC is your compiler.
2.  The Makefiles, and the shell/make scripts will now install to the release folder
    parallel to the compile, lib and pass3 folders.
    Executables in release/bin
    Run-time library in release/lib
    Include stdperm in release/Include
3.  The "install" command is particularly sensitive to the UNIX/Linux variant you
    are running, and the install section of the Makefiles will likely need fixing.
4.  The loader script "ld.i77.script" in "imp20XX/pass3" ass-u-mes
    that ld will use this script as part of the default GCC linker/loader stage.
    This ld.i77.script is ESSENTIAL.
    It ensures that Imp-77 line tracing and Imp-77 event handling data can be included.

    The Windows linker does this automatically
    Versions of the GCC binutils loader ld (upto 2.27) under WSL/Linux seem ok!
    Versions of the GCC binutils loader ld (after 2.27) have problems with relocation records

Note that external code for Windows have a "_" character prefix to a symbol name, Linux does not.
The provided bootstrap files are for the Linux/WSL version.


BOOTSTRAPPING

You don't necessarily need an IMP compiler already installed.
So the library and compiler directories contains
    1) the IMP source files
    2) the IMP intermediate files (.ibj) generated by the impdriver from the sources.
    3) some utilities written in the Free Pascal dialect to analyse
When packed the archive, the source and .ibj files are up-to-date, so "make" should only
need to compile the C portions, and link the object files.
Be aware of the possible tweaks mentioned above.

The compiler can be "bootstrapped" by running the appropriate bootstrap script in the imp2026 top folder.

The commands to run in order for bootstrapping are...

    * 1) run setenv.sh (or setenv.bat)
        This sets up the environment variables used by the various scripts
        ALWAYS run this "setenv" script once before using the IMP20xx compiler.

    * 2) run bootstrap.sh (or bootstrap.bat)
        2.1) This firstly builds the pass3 programs (used to generate the Elf .o files from .ibj files)
            2.1.1) Change folder to imp20xx/pass3
            2.1.2) For Linux
                2.1.2.1) make install
            2.1.3) For Windows
                2.1.3.1) make_pass3 install
            The pass3elf program is compiled from the pass3elf.c source (generates .rel relocations)
            The pass3coff.c program generates Windows COFF files from the same .ibj input.
            The pass3 programs and imp77 script are stored in the imp20xx/release/bin folder

        2.2) To make the IMP run-time library
            2.2.1) Change folder to imp20xx/lib
            2.2.2) For Linux
                2.2.2.1) make bootstrap
            2.2.3) For Windows
                2.2.3.1) make_lib bootstrap
            This builds the imp run-time library.
            It stores the library and imprtl-main object in imp20xx/release/lib
        2.3) To build the imp20xx compiler (the impdriver program)
            2.3.1) Change folder to imp20xx/compiler
            2.3.2) For Linux
                2.3.2.1) make bootstrap
            2.3.3) For Windows
                2.3.3.1) make_compiler bootstrap
            This builds the impdriver program and stores it in imp20xx/release/bin
        All the 2.x steps are done automatically by the bootstrap.sh/bootstrap.bat scripts

    At this point an IMP20xx compiler has been built.
    You can then logout and make a precautionary backup of the imp20xx folder tree.
    
    Please be aware that the Linux script setenv.sh creates a sub-process bash environment.
    So to logout you need to exit twice.

    
    To compile an IMP source program:
        On first logging in to a Linux/Windows process run the setenv.sh/setenv.bat script
        Thereafter use the imp77 script to compile any IMP source.
    To link multiple object files:
        Use imp77link (follwed by a list of module names - omit the .o or .obj file extension)

    NB Each makefile (or make_xxx.bat) has a superclean option to remove all temporary build files.

    By default all text files use the UNIX/Linux CR line ending.
    Install dos2unix (or use Notepad++) if needing to change Windows CR-LF line ending to CR line ending.

Bootstrapping has been tested in:-
 1) a WSL version 2 environment (Debian and Ubuntu 22.04 LTS)
    These environments use the latest version of the GNU binutils package
 2) a Centos-7 virtual machine
    This uses an earlier version of the GNU binutils package
 3) a Windows 11 environment
    
Let me know if this bootstrapping step doesn't work (via a github issue),
but only after you have tried all of the above installation "tweaks".


EXTRA INFO (for the more curious souls)

USER ENHANCEMENTS
Once the initial bootstrap generation of the IMP library and compiler programs is complete then
you can start to "enhance" the IMP compiler by modifying the source files in the compiler and lib folders.

Then to re-build the libraries and compiler
    * cd ../lib
    * make
    * cd ../compiler
    * make

To verify the re-built (but un-installed) compilers and libraries,
use the various imp examples in the "imp_tests" Git repository
Specify the -e option (== testmode) to the imp77 script when compiling a single
IMP-77 file, so that the un-installed compiler and libraries are used.

For multi-file IMP-77 programs you can use the imp77link script, however this script
only uses the installed compiler and libraries.

If there are no errors and you feel confident with your new "enhancements"
Then to install the new version of compiler and libraries
    * cd ../lib
    * make install
    * cd ../compiler
    * make install

Remember, always keep backups of the previous versions of source files and the
installed files.
If not, the GitHub repository should contain a set of files that can be used to
bootstrap the IMP compiler.

RUNNING THE IMP COMPILER
The compiler is invoked by the imp77 shell script.
The various options are:
    * -e  Uses the experimental compiler build (in imp20xx/compiler and imp20xx/lib)
    * -c  This just generates the ELF object file (no linking to an executable)
    * -Fc Generates a .cod file which lists the code generated by the compiler
    * -Fs Generates a .lst file which indicates any syntax errors found
    * -Fi retains the .ibj, .icd, .o files generated by the compiler
    * The .imp extension of the source file must be given
    *
    * The options can be combined.
    * e.g. imp77 -c -Fc -Fs -Fi pass2.imp
This retains all the intermediate files and generates the pass2 object file with
the .cod, .lsr, .ibj, .icd also being retained.

There is an additional script imp77link which can take an IMP program split
into several Imp source files and individually generate the ELF object files
before linking the ELF .o files into an executable.
Examples of the use of imp77link are in various Makefile files
1) in the compiler folder to build impdriver
2) in the tools/ibj folder to build slimibj

EXERCISE FOR USER
As an exercise, create a new script "imp77elink" which uses the un-installed/testmode library
 
UTILITIES
The Git repository "imp_tools" contains various utilities (written in IMP and Free Pascal)
These help to analyse the intermediate files (.icd, .ibj) generated by the compiler suite.
The pass1 executable generates the .icd intermediate files.
The pass2 executable generates the .ibj intermediate files.

BUILDING WINDOWS VERSION

Obtain the pre-requisite software for Windows

1) Copy/Git pull the git repository folder tree to a Windows folder
    (or obtain a .zip file of the folder source and unzip to a folder of your choice)
2) Run the bootstrap.bat script inside a command shell with access to the Visual Studio
   32-bit command line C compiler and linker.
3) This generates a release folder tree with a Windows version of the IMP compiler
4) Modify the setenv.bat script to point to the correct version of the Free Pascal compiler
5) When using the Visual Studio 32-bit command shell ensure you ALWAYS call setenv.bat
    This will give access to the IMP compiler and associated utilities.

COMPILING IMP MODULES

For Linux   : Use imp77 and imp77link scripts to compile and link IMP code modules
For Windows : Use imp32.bat and imp32link.bat scripts to compile and link IMP code modules


Good luck and enjoy!

Original implementation by:
Andy Davis
andy@nb-info.co.uk

Refreshed and enhanced by:
John McMullin
jdmcmullin@aol.com
